Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to look at decimal numbers which are an important
topic in primary school and in high school it's
also a subject that is fraught with potential
difficulties for the student and that's because
there's actually three sort of separate approaches
or aspects to decimal numbers decimal numbers
straddle pure mathematics and applied maths and
science so in fact there's sort of one approach to
decimal numbers in pure mathematics and a related
but quite different approach to decimal numbers
in applied maths or science and unless one keeps
these two aspects rather separate and is aware
of the differences and the relationships it's
easy to get a little bit confused about decimal
numbers there's another even more important source
of confusion about the subject which unfortunately
pervades much of modern pure mathematics this is a
subject that we're going to have to spend a lot of
time talking about in the future but I mentioned
at this point there is also unfortunately a phony
theory of infinite decimals infinite decimals
in quotes because the term actually doesn't
really work unfortunately this phony theory
has infiltrated modern pure mathematics very
systematically and now weakens the structure of
the subject in many many different places and in
many different ways this is a very key weakness to
modern mathematics which we're going to have to
address in this series and it's one of the aims
of our series to fix this kind of problem to very
clearly lay out what the difficulties are and to
address them head-on today we're going to look
at a very solid piece of mathematics the use of
decimal numbers in pure maths that's completely
clear we can lay it out completely precisely
there is no logical problem with it whatsoever so
today we're going to start talking about ordinary
decimal numbers within a pure mathematics context
in a few videos from now we'll also have a look at
the concept as it applies to science and applied
maths the framework that we're going to use here
is the hindu-arabic number system which were by
now quite familiar with so when we write down
something like two hundred and thirty seven
thousand five hundred and forty-nine we know
that these separate digits represent numbers
of certain units this nine represents nine
ones this four represents four tens or actually
forty this five represents five hundreds or five
hundred this seven represents seven thousand
seven thousand this three represents three ten
thousands you know there was a total of thirty
thousand and this two represents two hundred
thousands or total of two hundred thousand
so each place corresponds to a power of ten
starting with 1 then 10 then hundred thousand ten
thousand and hundred thousand now this is only
a representation of a natural number the actual
natural number has a more basic primitive aspect
to it we defined a natural number as a string of
ones okay I'm not going to write down this one
here because what takes somewhat too long but
here for example is as much smaller number 37
which is represented by all these ones on a row
and our hindu-arabic number system I remind you
basically amounts to dividing this large string
into more convenient units in this case 10 here
ten here ten here and then counting the number
of tens there's three of them and then there's
seven ones leftover that's the meaning of the
hindu-arabic notation and as an alternative we
didn't have to use strokes on a page we could
also have used dots or circles or maybe little
squares little squares or sometimes convenient so
the same number could be represented by this long
string of unit squares here's 10 here's another 10
here's another 10 and then 7 left over all right
so that's our standard hindu-arabic number system
and the decimal aspect was then introduced by the
Arabs and then modified later also by Europeans so
the idea is that we want to augment our system so
that it not just covers natural numbers but also
numbers that have a fractional aspect before we
get to the fractions let's emphasize that the
hindu-arabic system is a decimal system which
means that it's based on powers of 10 deca being
root for 10 in Greek so powers of 10 by that we
mean 10 times 10 times 10 and so on so here's 10
to the 1 which is just ordinary 10 and 10 to the
power 2 or 10 squared means 10 times 10 which we
usually call 110 cubed or 10 to the 3 is 10 times
10 times 10 3 tens multiplied together which is
a thousand four tens multiplied together gives
us ten thousand five tens multiplied together
gives us a hundred thousand notice that the
exponent here is the same as the number of zeros
that appears in the results six tens multiplied
together in other words 10 to the sixth here's
what we call a million written like this with
the zeros group conveniently in groups of three
and then there's ten to the seventh and ten to
the eighth which I haven't written but I have
written ten to the ninth which has nine zeros
that's one billion and then I haven't written
ten to the ten or 10 to the 11 but here's 10 to
the 12 which has 12 zeros and that's a trillion
so to go from one step here to the next we're
multiplying by ten multiplying by 10 by 10 by
10 by 10 by 10 but now from going from here
to here to go from a million to a billion we're
multiplying by 10 three times so 10 10 10 means
we're effectively multiplying by a thousand so we
go from here to here is a factor of a thousand so
a billion is a thousand million similar to go
from here to here we've also multiplied by 10
and then by 10 and then by 10 so we're multiplying
by 10 three times which is the same as multiplying
by a thousand so a billion times a thousand is
a trillion in ancient times numbers like this
would have been rarely used but of course with the
national debts of many countries these days these
are becoming more and more commonplace numbers
so here's a sort of random big number let's see
if we can read it we'll start here to get a sense
of how big it is so here there's that's ones tens
hundreds then these are the thousands these are
the millions these are the billions these are the
trillions so we would read this as 35 trillion
and here there's four hundred and thirty six
billion 209 million seventeen thousand and
988 so we would read that biggish number
so each place in the hindu-arabic system
corresponds to a power of 10 starting with the
most right digit which is units and we agree that
one is 10 to the 0 sort of to make this consistent
so that as we go up in this direction we're
multiplying by 10 the exponent goes up every time
by 1 and if we're going down in this direction
we're dividing by 10 so the exponent goes down
by one every time so it's consistent that this be
called 10 to the 0 so 10 to the 0 is 1 not as you
might think 0 that's a convention that we adopt
ok so now the ideas this is all very good for for
numbers sort of bigger than 1 for natural numbers
but sometimes we want to consider fractional
numbers we want to consider fractional numbers in
this kind of hindu-arabic system and that's what
decimal numbers do for us so now let's have a look
at fractions and how we might approach fractions
from this hindu-arabic powers of 10 point of view
so a fraction is a pair of natural numbers like
5 over 2 and generally speaking me I'll write
the fraction with a 5 divided by 2 rather than
a 5 slanted bar over 2 it's just a little bit
more convenient easier to see that way so this
is actually the fraction 5 over 2 and it's equal
to 2 plus 1/2 because 2 is the same as 4 over 2 2
and 1/2 is also written this way so this means 2
plus 1/2 here's another example 159 over 4 we can
rewrite that by peeling 3 of the 4 is away and
then we have 156 over 4 plus 3 over 4 that 156
over 4 can be written the natural number 39 and
then we have three quarters left over so this is a
standard way of rewriting this fraction has a kind
of a mixed fraction involving both natural numbers
and fraction between 0 and 1 so of course this
system does employ the hindu-arabic system because
we're writing the numerators and the denominators
both in our hindu-arabic form but we would like to
have something that's a little bit more with the
powers of 10 very explicit and so the idea is to
use negative powers of 10 as new units to deal
with quantities less than 1 that's the idea so
what do we mean by negative powers of 10 well 1
over 10 or 1/10 that fraction can be written as
10 to the minus 1 1 over 100 can be written as 10
to the minus 2 1 over a thousand can be written
as 10 to the minus 3 and so on 1 over a million
would be 10 to the minus 6 1 over a billion would
be 10 to the minus 9 1 over a trillion will be 10
to the minus 12 and so on this is good notation
for a number of reasons in particular if we want
to multiply by 10 so if we take this number we
multiply by 10 we're gonna get this number and
multiplying by 10 amounts to adding 1 to the
exponent here so 10 to the minus 2 if we change
that -2 by adding 1 we get 10 to the minus 1 so
multiplying by 10 increases the exponent by 1 adds
1 to the exponent on the other hand dividing by
10 goes in this direction I'm here to here the
exponent decreases by 1 all right so the idea
with decimal numbers is to include both positive
powers of 10 as well as negative powers of 10 in
our hindu-arabic framework so here's an example
of our new notation here's a number three for 7.25
the first thing that we notice is that there's a
point that point which is more or less on the base
here is called the decimal point and the things to
the left of the decimal point are just an ordinary
hindu-arabic number which in this case is the
number 347 so this position represents ones this
represents tens this represents hundreds and so on
if there were more digits that way the novelty is
what's happening to the right of the decimal point
that's the new feature of these decimal numbers
and each one of these positions corresponds also
to a power of 10 but now not to a positive power
of 10 but rather to a negative power of 10 so the
first one of those is 1/10 this position tells us
how many 1/10 this number has and this position
tells us how many one hundredths this number has
so altogether this expression is representing the
following combination 3 times 100 plus 4 times 10
plus 7 times 1 plus 2 times 1/10 plus 5 times one
hundredths in terms of the exponential notation
we have 3 times 10 squared which is 100 plus 4
times 10 to the 1 which is 10 plus 7 times 10 to
the 0 which is just 1 we've agreed plus 2 times 10
to the minus 1 to 10 to the minus 1 is our fancy
name for 1/10 plus 5 times 10 to the minus 2 10
to the minus 2 is our fancy name for 1 over 100
and you can see that's the systemic structure here
that the powers of 10 are decreasing one at a time
10 squared 10 to the 1 10 to the 0 which is just 1
10 to the minus 1 10 to the minus 2 there they are
there and just in terms of the unit's themselves
so the units are to the left of the decimal point
10 to the 0 and then 10 to the 1 10 to the 2 10 to
the 3 to the 4 to the right of the decimal point
10 to the minus 1 and then 10 to the minus 2 then
10 to the minus 3 and so on so these units have a
property that each one of them is worth 10 of the
previous one of the one to the right this 10 is
equal to 10 ones this hundred is equal to 10 tens
this thousand is equal to 1000 s this 10,000 is
10 thousands but that also works over here so this
one is actually 10 one tenths this is actually 10
times this just as this is 10 times that and this
is 10 times that and similarly 10 to the minus 1
or 1/10 is 10 times 10 to the minus 2 each unit
is 10 times the one to the right and 1/10 of the
one to the left so the units are getting bigger
as we go in this direction getting smaller as
we go in this direction representing smaller and
smaller numbers one tenth then one hundredth then
one thousands and then one ten thousands and
so on as long as we like so that's the basic
structure of what a decimal number is it's an
expression that represents sum of powers of 10
where the powers are allowed to be both positive
as well as negative giving us fractions as well
as natural numbers just a bit of terminology if
we have a decimal number like this then we'll say
that the part of the decimal number which is to
the left of the decimal point in this case 347 is
the natural number part because that in fact is a
natural number and the part including the decimal
and everything to the right of the decimal that's
the fractional part that's generally a number a
fraction between 0 and 1 this is a natural number
so in this case the fractional part is 0.25 and
let's remind you what does 0.25 mean it means
two tenths plus five hundredths well that's a
fraction that we can evaluate by getting it
over a common denominator the natural common
denominator is the higher power of 10 which is
a hundred so if we multiply top and bottom here
by 10 we get the equivalent fraction 20 over
100 then we can add these two just by adding
the numerators because the denominators are the
same to get 25 over 100 so 0.25 as a fraction is
the same as 25 over 100 and I probably should
have written here that of course is also equal
to 1/4 you can simplify this fraction to 1 over
4 so this 0.25 is also 1/4 so the whole decimal
number can be rewritten as a fraction as so if we
take the whole thing and we want to write it as a
fraction we could write this 347 and 25 hundreds
that says a mixed fraction or as a fraction sort
of an honest fraction number over number we would
multiply this by a hundred thirty-four thousand
and seven hundred and then add 25 to give us
3 for 725 over 100 so this number as a decimal
numbers same as that fraction or that as a mixed
fraction let's have a look at some more examples
like this so here's some more practice converting
decimals to fractions becoming familiar with what
decimals are and how they work so let's have a
look at 4.5 the meaning is 4 plus 5/10 because
this is one to the right of the decimal point it
means it represents a certain number of tenths
in other words five tenths okay now as this is a
fraction that can be reduced the 5 over 10 is the
same as 1 over 2 or 1/2 so this can be written
as 4 and 1/2 if we want to convert that into a
pure fraction get it over a common denominator
4 is the same as 8 halves so for a total of nine
halves and notice another way of doing that would
have been to start read at this point and we could
have converted that to a fraction by converting
the 4 to 40 over 10 so then this total would have
been 45 over 10 so notice this 4.5 and 45 over 10
they're the same he has known at 13.8 that's 13
plus 8 tenths 8 tenths could be reduced to 4/5 so
it's the same as 13 and 4/5 we want to convert it
into a pure fraction we multiply by 5 to get that
of our common denominator 5 that'd be 65 plus 4 is
69 over 5 but we could also have done something
like that I trained at this stage got it over a
common denominator of 10 that would have been 130
plus 8 over 10 so notice that what thirteen point
eight is the same as a fraction 138 divided by
10 here's 2.75 there's now two digits to the
right of the decimal this is the number two plus
seven tenths plus five hundredths so there's seven
one-tenths there's 5/100 in terms of money if one
represents one dollar then a tenth represents a
dime or a ten cent piece while one over a hundred
would represent a penny or a one cent piece so
we're talking about a certain number of dollars
in this case two dollars and seventy five cents
seven dimes and five cents if we want to get this
over a common denominator we could use a hundred
that'd be 70 hundreds if we added that together we
get two plus 75 over 100 which we could write as
two hundred and seventy five over 100 or we could
also reduce this because 75 over 100 is the same
as three quarters and then we could write that as
eleven quarters so that's what it looks like in
simplified reduced form this way of writing it is
easy because it just comes from here very directly
2.75 is the same as 275 divided by a hundred and
here's an example with three digits to the right
one of them happens to be a zero so this is 9
plus 3 tenths plus zero hundredths plus five
thousandths or five times one thousandth we want
to get that all over common denominator we would
use the largest power of ten which is a thousand
we would write three over ten as three hundred
over a thousand then adding up all these things
over a thousand gives us three hundred and five
over a thousand so this as a fraction is nine and
three hundred and five over a thousand which we
could write as a pure fraction nine thousand
and three hundred and five over a thousand
we also simplify this this is not simplified
because we could divide by five there to
make it more reduced fraction if we wanted to
these examples on the previous slide suggest a
systematic approach for converting a decimal
number to a fraction the systematic approach
is to take the decimal and multiply it by a
certain power of 10 to get a natural number
for example suppose we want to know what is 8.9
as a fraction well if we multiply this by 10 what
happens the eight ones become eight tens the nine
one tenths become nine ones so we get 89 in other
words what happens is that the decimal point moves
from there over one there's actually a decimal
point right there which we don't write because
by convention if we have a natural number we
don't write with a decimal point but nevertheless
eight point nine times 10 equals 89 and so now we
can divide both sides by 10 to see that eight
point nine is the same as 89 over 10 the same
kind of thing that we observed in the examples on
the previous slide if we want to convert fourteen
point two three to a fraction we could multiply
by a hundred what does that do well multiplying
by ten moves the decimal point over or shifts all
the digits one to the left and if we multiply by a
hundred well it moves everything over two places
to the left giving us one for two three with a
decimal point there and so not written so if we
take this expression and divide both sides by a
hundred we see that fourteen point two three is
the same as one thousand four hundred and twenty
three divided by a hundred so there is the decimal
there's a fraction for it here's another example
where we have only nonzero digits to the right
generally could the convention is that if we have
a decimal we'll put a zero on the natural number
part of it just to alert us to the fact that we
are we've got a decimal number there so this is
zero ones zero tens 104 one 104 one thousandths
what is that as a fraction well we want to move
that decimal point over three places to do that
we'll multiply it by a thousand multiplying
it by ten moves it over one by 10 and again
moves into over again 2 by 10 again moves it once
more so when we multiply by a thousand we get 14
and so now when we divide both sides of this
by a thousand we see that 0.01 4 is 14 1000s
now I hope what's becoming clear here is that
the fractions that we're getting are rather of
a special kind we are only getting fractions
with powers of 10 as their denominators that's
a special feature of decimal numbers we're
not going to get every fraction this way
only rather special fractions the ones
with powers of 10 as their denominators
next time we're going to have a further look
at arithmetic with these decimal numbers and
we're going to talk a little bit about how
we visualize them how we think about them
geometrically I hope you'll join me for that
.im Norman Wildberger thanks for listening